## Security Counter Measures

### Firewall

Its is the fundamental component of network security, can be defined as a software application designed to monitor and control the outgoing and the incomming packets in a network.<br>

It acts as a barrier between the internal network and the outer network.<br>

Its primary function is to allow non-threateing traffic and block malicious traffic into the network.

**Used for** : <br>

1. **Packert Filtering** : It mointers each and every data packet and based on a certain criteria such as destination IP address, source IP address, port numbers. Packets which meet a certain condition are allowed others are blocked.
2. **Logging and monitors** : Firewall logs and network logs allows admin's in cyber criminal investigation in case a of cyber attack.
3. **Load Balancing** : In Large organizations when traffic load on a particular server is high, then firewall prevent access to that particlular server to distribute the traffic evenly.
4. **AccessControl** : By specifiying which devices are allowed to enter the network with a network control list (ACL).
5. **Port and Protocol Control** : Firewall can control traffic from a specific port or portocol. For example, they can be allowed to accept the traffic from port 80 while blocking the traffic from other ports.

##### Circuit level Firewalls

It provides User Datagram Protocol and Transmission Control Protocol connection securly.

##### Stateful Inspection Firewalls

Also called <mark>Dynamic Filtering</mark>, this firewall can detect weather a packet belongs to a particular session or not. It will only permit the packet if it belong to a session between two endpoints. <br.

##### Network Address Translation Firewall

- This type of firewall usually hides the IP address by generating a unique IP address for public use.<br>
- Unique IP address is assigned to each device connected to the network. For attackers it becomes harder to identify a particular host connected to a private network.

## Intrusion detection system

It is a cyber security strategy which monitors traffic & system activites and digital assets to indentify and respond to malicious activities and potiential security threats to the system or network.<br>

The main goal of IDS is the detect unauthorized access, data breaches, data theft and alert the administrators about them to mitigate them. <br>

### Methods of IDS

1. **Signature based IDS** : In this type IDS searches for source address, destination address, portocol, port number in each and every packet in the system or network. <br> A database is created for all the type of attack pattern that can occur in a packet.<br> The pattern of each packet is then matched with the one in the database, if their exist a match then alarm is generated.<br>This method is successfull in detecting known attacks but cannot identify known attacks.<br> Manual Updation is required to add newly generated attack pattern to the system.<br>
2. **Anomoy based detection** : monitors the behavior of the system.<br> If a behavior of the system is different from predefined behavior then a alarm is generated by the network.<br> Suppose an employee which has certain access in a organization performs a activity which is not in scope of his/her capabilities then IDS will generate alarm.<br>

### Types of IDS

1. **NIDS** : This is a entire network based IDS, Monitor and captures network traffic, detect malicious data present in the packets. Match each packet pattern with the library of known. <br> This system is independent of the operating system, though is does not analyze the encrypted traffic.
2. **HIDS** : Installed on individual hosts.<br> Monitors the packets sent to and from an individual host only and generates an alert when suspicious activity happens. A snapshot of the previous system and current system is compared to detect intrusion.

> IDS is kept between the firewall and the network.

### Intrusion prevention system

It has the same functinonality that IDS does, the main difference between both of them is IPS actively defends the network by stopping the attack and also performs alert mechanisms (Tells the packet "You shell not Pass 😁".<br>
It also performs cyclic redundancy check (CRC), and packet defragmentation to clean and maintain the integrity of the data packets.

### Password cracking

It is the method of using application programs to recover deleted or forgotten passwords, attackers also use these applications to maliciously gaining the password of victims and perform unauthorized access to the resources.

1. **Brute Force Attack** : In this type of password cracking user trys all the possible combination of the passwords possible until the correct one is found.<br>
   This approach is called brute force because this technique relays on the computer computing power of guessing the correct password.<br>
   <span style='color:red;'>Prevention</span><br>
   Use complex password which are difficult to guess.<br>
   Use 2FA, such as one-time-password login.<br>
   _Rate limiting_ to prevent repetated login attempts.<br>

2. **Dictionary Attack** : In this type of attack, attacker maintains his/her own dictionary of all possible password combination.<br>
   The dictionary file is provided to password guessing application programs, the program tries all the words present in the dictionary hoping to get a password match.<br>

3. **Rainbow Table Attack** : The Attacker maintains a dictionary of all pre-compiled hashes called <mark>Rainbow Tables</mark>, when the attacker gains control of all the password hashes, the attacker quickly look up for matches in the rainbow tables. If a match is found then attacker sees the corresponding plain text in the rainbow table.<br>
   Attackers need to know the hashing algorithm used for hashing.

#### Cookie replay attack / Session Hijacking Attack

In this type of attack, the attacker intercepts and with the help of valid user session keys gains unauthorized access to the web-application or website.<br>
Cookies are small peices of information that are stored in the device that contains the information related to their session, such as session-ID, tokens, other session-related data.<br>
By intercepting cookies, an attacker can impersonate a legitimate user and potentially gain access to their account.

**Prevention** : <br>

1. Always use HTTPS.
2. Secure cookies : enable the secure flag in the cookies to make sure that cookies are always transmitted over secure HTTPS.
3. Use Security Headers : use security headers like CSP (Content Security Policy).

### Database security threats

Certainly database security is crucial for protecting sensitive information and preventing unauthorized access to the database, data breaches.<br>

1. **Unauthorized access** : <span style='color:red;'>SQL Injection,</span> the attacker tries to manipulate the input fields of the web-application and inject malicious SQL query which leads to unathorized access to database.
2. **Data Leakage** : Attacker try to gain access to the user data stored in database and tries to sell the data to dark-web.
3. **Weak or Unpatched Softwares** : Software application with not the latest update always have known vulnerabilities that attacker will exploit easily.
4. **DDOS**
5. **Privilege escalation** : People with a restricted privilege try to escalate their privilege to gain unauthorized access.
6. **Secure database backups** : The backups of the database should be done and secured properly.
